









                            IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL

                                   for the

                               UNITED NATIONS
                                 CONVENTION
                                   ON THE
                              RIGHTS OF PERSONS
                              WITH DISABILITIES










                         WORLD NETWORK OF USERS AND
                           SURVIVORS OF PSYCHIATRY





                                FEBRUARY 2008
                         WORLD NETWORK OF USERS AND
                           SURVIVORS OF PSYCHIATRY


                        IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL for the
                      UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE
                     RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES


                             TABLE  OF CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION   ---------------------------------------------------  page 3

OUR PARTICIPATION IN THE DRAFTING AND
NEGOTIATION OF THE CONVENTION   ----------------------   page 4

HOW TO USE THIS MANUAL  -----------------------------------   page 6

GUIDE TO THE TEXT  ----------------------------------------------   page 7

 1.  HIGHLIGHTS OF THE CONVENTION: Q and A  -------     page 7


 2.  GUIDE TO TERMINOLOGY, DEFINITIONS
    AND DESCRIPTIONS   ----------------------------------------     page 9


 3.  THE PRINCIPLES OF THE CONVENTION  --------------   page 10


 4.  SUMMARY OF THE PROVISIONS
    IN THE CONVENTION AND
    GUIDE TO IMPLEMENTATION ---------------------------- page 12

HOW CAN WE ACCOMPLISH
WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE?  ------------------------------------  page 29

 1.  POSITIVE MEASURES RELATING TO
    KEY ARTICLES OF THE CONVENTION -----------------     page 29


 2.  DEVELOP ORGANIZATIONS AND SUPPORT FOR
    USERS AND SURVIVORS TO OPPOSE
    COERCIVE PSYCHIATRY------------------------------------   page 42




 3.  DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A NETWORK
    WITH OTHER DISABILITY RIGHTS ACTIVISTS ------  page 42


 4.  DEVELOP GOVERNMENT SUPPORT
    FOR THE CONVENTION  ------------------------------------  page 42


 5.  EDUCATE OURSELVES ABOUT HUMAN RIGHTS
    [TO BE ADDED] ------------------------------------------------  page 42


 6.  DEVELOP RELATIONSHIPS WITH THE MEDIA
    [TO BE ADDED] ------------------------------------------------  page 42

MONITORING ---------------------------------------------------------
page 43

APPENDICES  --------------------------------------------------------- page
47
                         WORLD NETWORK OF USERS AND
                           SURVIVORS OF PSYCHIATRY


                        IMPLEMENTATION MANUAL for the
                      UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE
                     RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES


The World Network of Users and Survivors of Psychiatry is proud to proclaim
the new United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD) as a major victory for users and survivors of
psychiatry all around the world.

      Our biggest victory – a paradigm shift away from a model based on
      paternalism to one based on respect for our human rights – is in the
      text of Article 12 on legal capacity.  States have to recognize that
      persons with disabilities enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with
      others.  What does this mean?  We understand legal capacity in the
      sense of capacity to act, which is both the right to make decisions,
      and a legal status equal with other adults in one's society.  Deciding
      whether to accept medical treatment or go into a hospital is an
      exercise of legal capacity.  If someone else, whether a doctor, court,
      or imposed guardian, is authorized by law to substitute their will for
      your own, this deprives you of the right to exercise legal capacity on
      an equal basis with others.  Mental health commitment laws violate
      Article 12.  In addition, the whole system of guardianship violates
      Article 12.  Sometimes people are put under guardianship and the
      guardian can put them into a psychiatric institution and consent on
      their behalf to forced ECT and drugs.  Instead of a guardian, the
      person should be offered support if he or she chooses it; and the
      support has to respect his or her will and preferences (from Article
      12.4).


           ******************************************************



                    OUR PARTICIPATION IN THE DRAFTING AND
                        NEGOTIATION OF THE CONVENTION

An international team of users and survivors of psychiatry, led by Tina
Minkowitz, participated actively in the negotiations at the United Nations
(UN) in New York from the first session of the Ad Hoc Committee in August
2002 through the adoption of the completed text on December 13, 2006.  The
Ad Hoc Committee was a unique process for all of us.  We seized a historic
opportunity and accomplished something basic and fundamental that has
changed the human rights landscape for us and for all people with
disabilities.  Many of us made lasting friendships with each other and with
other people with disabilities and allies, from around the world.  Working
together closely, over the course of several years, in person at the UN and
by email discussions, we brought user/survivor issues into the heart of the
disability movement and found a rich common ground, especially on the issue
of legal capacity, which is the ultimate test of the guarantee of full and
equal enjoyment of human rights.

Users and survivors from the World Network of Users and Survivors of
Psychiatry (WNUSP), MindFreedom/Support Coalition International (MF/SCI)
and other organizations came to the UN from  Canada,  Denmark,  Ghana,
Guinea,  Hungary,  Ireland,  India,  Japan,  New Zealand,  Nicaragua,
Peru,  Sweden,  Uganda,  the United Kingdom,  and the United States of
America.  WNUSP members served on New Zealand’s and Sweden’s government
delegations.  We were an impressive force.  WNUSP helped to create the
International Disability Caucus (IDC) and participated actively in its
governance through our seat on the steering committee.  The IDC had a
principle of respecting the leadership of disabled people’s organizations
(DPOs), and respecting any particular DPO on matters relating to its
constituency.  In addition, we agreed that the Convention should “be
equally relevant to all persons with disabilities, irrespective of the type
of disability or geographical location”.  This helped to ensure
solidarity. 

WNUSP contributed several position papers of our own, including proposed
text for the treaty, much of which was accepted.  When the IDC began
working together to present a unified position, we authored and/or
coordinated the work of the IDC on some important articles, including
Article 12 on legal capacity, Article 14 on liberty, Article 15 on torture,
Article 17 on integrity of the person, Article 22 on privacy, Article 23 on
home and family, Article 27 on employment, Article 29 on political
participation, and part of Article 25 on health.  An important aspect of
our work was building alliances, building consensus, and learning to
collaborate with other disability rights activists.   Finally the IDC spoke
with one coherent and powerful voice to promote a human rights agenda for
all persons with disabilities.

WNUSP involvement started even before the first Ad Hoc Committee meeting,
when we learned of a meeting being held in Mexico City in June 2002 to
bring together experts to discuss the Convention.  WNUSP requested and
received an invitation, and submitted a paper that set out the main tenets
of our advocacy as well as commenting on the draft text that the Mexican
government had prepared.  The meeting successfully established our role in
the community of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and our advocacy was
made part of a paper agreed to by the NGOs at the meeting.

The first Ad Hoc Committee meeting established an agreement to continue the
process of “considering proposals for a Convention,” and the second (in
June 2003) agreed to set up a working group to produce a draft text for
negotiation, drawing on proposals submitted by governments and civil
society (including WNUSP).  Tina Minkowitz represented WNUSP as one of 12
NGOs that participated in the working group, along with 27 governments and
one national human rights institution.  In this group, which convened in
January 2004, all participants had an equal voice and collaborated to
produce the resulting text.  Users and survivors of psychiatry finally had
a seat at the table and spoke with a passion and clarity that was heard
around the world.

Then it was time for negotiation, when all governments and civil society
organizations (including those that had not participated in the working
group) had the opportunity first to improve the text, and then to settle on
a final version that everyone could live with.  It was not an easy process,
and attempts were also made to weaken the text.  However, the IDC’s
approval was sought and wanted, since we represented the constituency that
is supposed to benefit from the Convention.  This was important for WNUSP
in securing recognition of equal legal capacity, liberty on an equal basis,
free and informed consent and right to respect for integrity of the person,
all without the limitations that had previously been inserted into
documents dealing with the rights of users and survivors of psychiatry.
WNUSP and MF/SCI participated in several side events during the Ad Hoc
Committee meetings primarily focusing on the importance of recognition of
legal capacity on an equal basis with others and of the freedom to make our
own decisions.  We worked hard and lobbied hard, and had to listen to a lot
of disrespectful opinions.  In the last stages of the process we had to
deal with a betrayal of our interests in a political process, when a
footnote was inserted limiting the meaning of legal capacity in Arabic,
Chinese and Russian to “capacity for rights” and not “capacity to act”.
But we were able to turn this around, with the help of our IDC allies and
many governments who did not accept the footnote, and removing the footnote
was the victory that capped our experience.

WNUSP Co-chair Tina Minkowitz was one of the two IDC speakers that welcomed
the adoption of the Convention by the UN General Assembly on December 13,
and several other WNUSP and MF/SCI members were also present.  On that day,
we all stood tall and proud of what we had accomplished, and Myra Kovary
summed it up by saying, “Let the revolution begin!”

The Convention was open for signing on March 30, 2007 and it was signed by
almost half of the UN member states on the opening day, indicating their
intent to ratify (become legally bound by the Convention).  It is now the
task of the world community to bring the ideals that are laid out in the
Convention into reality.

           ******************************************************
                           HOW TO USE THIS MANUAL

This manual is intended for users and survivors of psychiatry, and
user/survivor organizations, as an informational guide and reference for
working with the Convention.  Users and survivors have the opportunity to
work with their government, through a national consultation process, on
implementing the Convention, and also incorporate the Convention into
advocacy they are doing (for instance, to get people out of institutions or
stop forced drugging or electroshock).  The Convention is a rich document
and people may choose to focus on one or another area, depending on
circumstances and priorities.

We have highlighted the aspects of the Convention that address the human
rights violations especially targeted against users and survivors of
psychiatry, in the areas of legal capacity, liberty and right to live in
the community, freedom from forced psychiatric interventions, our inclusion
as people with disabilities and participation in enforcement mechanisms.
These are the areas that we believe will make a difference in the lives of
all users and survivors of psychiatry, and without which other guarantees,
such as the right to work and the right to vote, are meaningless to us.

Users and survivors of psychiatry are urged to read this manual together
with the text of the Convention, and to apply it creatively to situations
they are facing.  Besides guaranteeing specific rights, the Convention
requires equality and non-discrimination in the enjoyment of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms.  If the Convention and this manual do not
address a particular situation, users and survivors can find the articles
that seem most relevant and make their best argument.  Human rights lawyers
can help, but may also need to be educated by the user/survivor movement to
present our issues correctly.

We face challenges in implementing the Convention, since there is as yet no
government that complies with its requirements in relation to users and
survivors of psychiatry.  Many governments will contest the obligations in
the Convention and fight to keep their guardianship and mental health laws,
to continue psychiatric detention and violence, and promote a deficit-based
view of psychosocial disability requiring medical model “treatments”.  They
will try to find loopholes or interpret it to make exceptions for the
obligations they would rather not comply with.  However, we have had many
victories in the process of creating the Convention, and there are
encouraging signs that our message has been heard by some governments, and
that our allies in the disability and human rights communities will
continue to work with us at the international and national levels.  The
challenges we face are not unique to our situation but are the same
challenges faced by any group of disenfranchised people claiming our human
rights as recognized in an international treaty.  Our movement has matured
a great deal through the treaty process and will continue to meet the
challenges to break through to real change in the lives of users and
survivors of psychiatry everywhere.

           ******************************************************

                              GUIDE TO THE TEXT

1. HIGHLIGHTS OF THE CONVENTION

   Q: What is the Disability Convention?

   A: Convention is another word for treaty, a binding agreement between
   nations. The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)
   is a multilateral treaty, a treaty among many nations. It declares
   specific obligations of governments to respect and enforce the human
   rights of persons with disabilities.


   Q: Does the Convention cover users and survivors of psychiatry?


   A: Article 1 of the CRPD states that the purpose of the Convention is to
   protect and promote all human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
   persons with disabilities. This article in its definition of persons with
   disabilities includes those who have mental impairments. This formulation
   clearly includes users and survivors of psychiatry.


   A: The purpose of the Convention is to protect and promote all human
   rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities,
   including those who have mental impairments.  Users and survivors of
   psychiatry are covered by this language.


   Q: How does the Convention deal with the issue of legal capacity?


   A: The concept of legal capacity has been used to deny personhood and to
   disqualify users and survivors from managing our own lives. Art 12 of the
   CRPD has dismantled these deprivations by conferring personhood to all
   persons with disabilities and by recognizing that we have the legal
   capacity to run our own lives.  Also if we so desire, we can seek support
   to exercise our legal capacity. Thus support is no longer inflicted upon
   us whether we want I it or not, rather it is assistance which has to be
   made available if we wish to use it.


   Q: Does the Convention prohibit forced drugging and electroshock?


   A: Article 17 grants to all persons with disabilities the right to
   respect for their physical and mental integrity on an equal basis with
   others.  It is this right which protects persons who do not have
   disabilities from unwelcome treatment, forcible confinement or any other
   unwelcome invasion of their body and mind.  Article 17, by its guarantee
   of equality and non discrimination, also makes these available to us.
   This guarantee is further strengthened by the fact that article 25
   obliges health care professionals to provide treatment only on the basis
   of free and informed consent.  Free and informed consent can only be
   given by the person concerned, and not by family members, courts or
   others.  (This follows from the guarantee of legal capacity).  In
   addition under article 15 the Convention protects the right to freedom
   from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
   which includes medical or scientific experimentation without consent.
   The cumulative effect of these provisions is to oust forced psychiatry.



   Q: Does the Convention allow forced institutionalization/
   hospitalization?


   A: Persons with disabilities have the right to liberty on an equal basis
   with others, and deprivation of liberty cannot be justified on the basis
   of disability.  People with disabilities also have the right to live in
   the community, and to choose where and with whom to live, on an equal
   basis with others (and legal capacity ensures that each person can
   exercise this right directly and not have a guardian or family member
   substitute their decision).  Forced institutionalization or
   hospitalization on the basis of disability is therefore prohibited.


   Q: What does the Convention say about people with psychosocial
   disabilities who are a danger to others?


   People with disabilities who violate the rights of others have the right
   to be treated on an equal basis with others by the police and penal law
   systems, including the provision of reasonable accommodation.


   Q: How will the Convention be enforced?


   A: An international monitoring committee will be set up to receive
   reports from governments and make recommendations; the international
   committee can also receive complaints from individuals whose rights have
   been violated, but only if the government has ratified the Optional
   Protocol along with the Convention.  There will be a national focal point
   for implementation in the government, and also a national monitoring
   mechanism with independent powers.  Along with other persons with
   disabilities, users and survivors of psychiatry have the right to
   participate in government processes to implement the Convention (e.g. law
   reform and policymaking).

   2. GUIDE TO TERMINOLOGY, DEFINITIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS

   During the negotiations, it was impossible for the parties to agree on a
   definition of disability that included all persons with disabilities and
   excluded no person with a disability.  The Preamble of the Convention in
   subparagraph (e) recognizes “that disability is an evolving concept.”
   Article 1 of the Convention states that, “The purpose of the present
   Convention is to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment
   of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with
   disabilities, and to promote respect for their inherent dignity.  Persons
   with disabilities include those who have long-term physical, mental,
   intellectual or sensory impairments which in interaction with various
   barriers may hinder their full and effective participation in society on
   an equal basis with others.”


   During the course of the negotiations, WNUSP developed language to refer
   to persons with psychiatric disabilities that moved away from the medical
   model of individual pathology.  We described ourselves as persons with
   psychosocial disabilities.  The word psychosocial refers to the
   interaction between psychological and social/cultural components of our
   disability.  The psychological component refers to ways of thinking and
   processing our experiences and our perception of the world around us.
   The social/cultural component refers to societal and cultural limits for
   behavior that interact with those psychological differences/madness as
   well as the stigma that the society attaches to labeling us as disabled.


   However, in using the term psychosocial, we have no in intention of
   associating ourselves with the psychosocial rehabilitation movement.  The
   term psychosocial disability is not yet understood in most countries of
   the world, and therefore, at the end of the negotiations, we agreed to
   use the more generally understood terminology of mental impairment in the
   text of the Convention.  Persons with mental impairments include users
   and survivors of psychiatry who experience or have experienced
   experiencing madness and/or mental health problems and/or are using or
   surviving, or have used or survived psychiatry/mental health services, as
   well as those of us who are perceived by others as having a mental
   disability/impairment.


   We prefer to use the term “psychosocial disability” and would like to
   introduce it into the vocabulary rather than use the term “mental
   impairment” when we are lobbying for implementation of the Convention.
   We recognize that there may be difficulties in translating the word
   “psychosocial” into languages other than English.  We urge members of
   WNUSP to confer with each other and use their best judgment in making the
   translation.

   3. THE PRINCIPLES OF THE CONVENTION

   The general principles of the Convention are articulated in Article 3 as
   follows:

      (a) Respect for inherent dignity, individual autonomy including the
      freedom to make one’s own choices, and independence of persons;


      (b) Non-discrimination;


      (c) Full and effective participation and inclusion in society;


      (d) Respect for difference and acceptance of persons with disabilities
      as part of human diversity and humanity;


      (e) Equality of opportunity;


      (f) Accessibility;


      (g) Equality between men and women;


      (h) Respect for the evolving capacities of children with disabilities
      and respect for the right of children with disabilities to preserve
      their identities.


   There are some important concepts in the preamble that do not reappear in
   the binding articles.


      Preamble:


      (e) recognizes that disability is an evolving concept and that
      disability results from the interaction between persons with
      impairments and attitudinal and environmental barriers that hinder
      their full participation in society on an equal basis with others


      (i) recognizes the diversity of persons with disabilities


      (j) specifically includes those persons with disabilities who require
      more intensive support


      (p) concerned about multiple forms of discrimination and specifically
      mentions discrimination on the basis of indigenous origin


      (t) highlights that the majority of persons with disabilities live in
      poverty and recognizes the critical need to address the negative
      impact of poverty on persons with disabilities.


   The application of these principles will radically alter the lives of
   persons with psychosocial disabilities.  Some of the consequences will
   be:

      - the abolition of mental health commitment laws, guardianship, and
      the insanity defense


      - the creation of a wide range of healing support, and


      - the liberation of our people from institutions.

   4.  SUMMARY OF THE PROVISIONS IN THE CONVENTION AND GUIDE TO
   IMPLEMENTATION

      Article 1 sets out the purpose of the Convention, to guarantee equal
      enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms to all people
      with disabilities, and names certain groups of people with
      disabilities as being included (people with long-term physical,
      mental, sensory and intellectual impairments which in combination with
      various barriers may hinder participation in society).


      Article 2 sets out definitions including definitions of


            •   “discrimination on the basis of disability” (a distinction
           on the basis of disability that has the purpose or effect of
           limiting human rights or fundamental freedoms, and
           discrimination includes the denial of reasonable accommodation)


            •   “reasonable accommodation” (adjustments needed in a
           particular case to ensure equal enjoyment and exercise of human
           rights and fundamental freedoms)


      Article 3 sets out principles of the Convention, including:
              
            •   Individual autonomy, including the freedom to make one’s own
           choices

           •   Respect for disability as part of human diversity

           •   Non-discrimination
            
      Article 4 guarantees all human rights and fundamental freedoms to
      people with disabilities without discrimination, and requires
      governments to change their laws and practices to comply with the
      Convention.  An important provision in Article 4 obligates governments
      to consult closely with organizations of people with disabilities in
      implementing the convention and in all issues relating to people with
      disabilities.


           What needs to be done:


                 Article 4 can be used by itself or in conjunction with
                 other articles of the Convention to do away with laws,
                 policies and practices that violate the human rights of
                 people with disabilities.


                 1) All discriminatory laws must be repealed.  This includes
                 guardianship or incapacity laws, provisions disqualifying
                 people from legal acts based on disability (such as
                 exercising the right to vote or to marry), and mental
                 health laws authorizing deprivation of liberty or
                 psychiatric interventions without the free and informed
                 consent of the person concerned.


                 2) Discrimination against people with psychosocial
                 disabilities must be prohibited by law.  Psychosocial
                 disability must be included on an equal basis with other
                 types of disability in anti-discrimination legislation.


                 3) Governments must ensure that public officials and
                 agencies do not discriminate based on disability or
                 otherwise violate the Convention.  Governments must also
                 take measures to eliminate discrimination by individuals,
                 organizations or private enterprises.


                 4) Coercive and violent psychiatric interventions
                 constitute discrimination and must be abolished.


                 5) Organizations of users and survivors of psychiatry have
                 a right to be consulted on implementation of the Convention
                 and all other matters of law and policy of concern to us.


                 6) Enforce the guarantees in the Convention and provide
                 legal remedies for violations.

      Article 5 guarantees equal protection and equal benefit of the law and
      prohibiting discrimination based on disability, and requires
      reasonable accommodation to be provided.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) Prohibit all forms of discrimination and enforce anti-
                 discrimination laws.


                 2) Identify what reasonable accommodation means for people
                 with psychosocial disabilities and ensure that such
                 accommodation is provided.  Situations where reasonable
                 accommodation may be needed include interactions with
                 government agencies (including police and penal law
                 systems), education, work, and exercise of legal capacity
                 (supported decision-making).

      Article 6 guarantees to women and girls with disabilities the equal
      enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and requires
      measures for the advancement, development and empowerment of women.
       
           What needs to be done:

                 1) Protect women and girls from discrimination based on
                 gender, disability or the interaction of gender and
                 disability.


                 2) Identify areas of multiple or intersecting
                 discrimination affecting women and girls who are users and
                 survivors of psychiatry, and take appropriate action.


                 For example:


                 Gender-based violence and discrimination is mutually
                 reinforcing with psychiatric violence, such as:


                       •   Psychiatric labeling of the experience of rape
                       survivors


                       •   Institutions confining women and men together,
                       facilitating rape


                       •   Effect of electroshock and psychiatric drugs in
                       destroying women’s ability to resist oppression


                       •   These violations are not limited to women, but
                       are a defining part of women’s experiences as
                       survivors of psychiatry; obligations to prevent
                       violence (Article 16) and combat cultural stereotypes
                       (Article 8), as well as similar obligations under the
                       Convention to Eliminate Discrimination Against Women
                       (CEDAW), should be addressed from a gender and
                       disability perspective to include such matters.


      Article 7 guarantees to children with disabilities the same rights as
      other children, including the right to express themselves freely and
      have their views taken into account on matters concerning them, and to
      have age- and disability-appropriate support in exercising these
      rights.


           What needs to be done:


                 1) Ensure that children are listened to and their wishes
                 respected regarding the use of mental health and other
                 services.


                 2) Children must not be subjected to electroshock,
                 psychosurgery, or neuroleptic drugs.  Any other psychiatric
                 interventions must include the participation of the
                 children with respect for their right to health care on the
                 basis of free and informed consent (see Article 25) in the
                 context of their evolving capacities as defined in Article
                 12 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
                 Child.

                 3) Provide children with appropriate support to understand
                 matters concerning them and to express their views.

      Article 8 addresses awareness-raising and requires governments to
      foster respect for the rights of people with disabilities and to
      combat prejudice and harmful practices, at all levels of society
      including families and communities.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) Promote language and concepts that are positive and non-
                 judgmental about states of mind and ways of expressing
                 oneself.


                 2) Assist communities to develop the capability to support
                 and interact with people in crisis.


                 3) Develop and teach non-violent and non-discriminatory
                 methods of conflict resolution.  It is not acceptable to
                 use psychiatric labeling, institutionalization, or
                 interventions, or legal incapacitation, to resolve
                 conflicts.

      Article 9 requires states to take measures to ensure access by persons
      with disabilities on an equal basis with others to the physical
      environment, transportation, information and communications, and other
      facilities and services provided to the general public.


           What needs to be done:


                 Ensure that the access needs of people with psychosocial
                 disabilities are identified and addressed, in consultation
                 with user/survivor organizations.

      Article 10 reaffirms the right to life of all human beings and
      obligates governments to ensure its effective enjoyment by people with
      disabilities on an equal basis with others.


      The right to life (Article 10) does not override the right to liberty
      (Article 14) when it comes to issues of suicidality.  The right to
      life cannot be superseded by the right to liberty.  Both rights must
      be respected.


           What needs to be done:


                 1) Prosecute murders of people with disabilities, and
                 ensure the means of survival for people with disabilities
                 on an equal basis with others.


                 2) Suicide and assisted suicide are controversial in the
                 disability community. Suicide may be a valid personal
                 choice, but it can also be a response to preventable
                 conditions of deprivation, violence and discrimination.
                 Neither criminal sanctions nor coercive psychiatry is an
                 appropriate response to suicidal attempts or wishes.
                 People with experience of suicidality should be considered
                 experts on this issue when developing law and policy.

      Article 11 requires governments to respect international human rights
      and humanitarian law in situations of armed conflict, humanitarian
      emergencies and natural disasters, and take measures to ensure the
      safety of people with disabilities in these circumstances.


           What needs to be done:


                 1) Ensure that people with psychosocial disabilities have
                 access to needed support systems and to safety measures and
                 the necessities of life, and are not restricted any more
                 than the general population.


                 2) Until such time as persons with psychosocial
                 disabilities are not held in institutions, governments must
                 develop emergency plans to ensure the safety of such
                 persons during situations of armed conflict, humanitarian
                 emergencies and natural disasters.


      Article 12 guarantees the right to enjoy legal capacity, including
      both the capacity to have rights and the capacity to act (to exercise
      rights and responsibilities and make decisions in everyday life), and
      requires governments to provide access to support in exercising legal
      capacity for those who may need it; any measures related to the
      exercise of legal capacity must respect a person’s rights, will and
      preferences, and safeguards must be established to prevent abuse.
           What needs to be done:
                 Article 12 is the most innovative and far-reaching
                 provision in the Convention, and has a major significance
                 for users and survivors of psychiatry.  Instead of being
                 treated as non-persons to be acted on by others, assistance
                 will be offered in times of crisis, confusion or distress,
                 which we have the right to accept or refuse.
                 1) Repeal guardianship and incapacity laws and provisions
                 throughout the legal system.
                 2) Abolish the insanity defense and replace with disability-
                 neutral standards for adjudicating criminal responsibility
                 (e.g. actual criminal intent, taking account of the
                 circumstances of the crime, motivation, etc.).
                 3) Develop mechanisms to provide support in making
                 decisions to a wide range of people with disabilities with
                 diverse needs.
                 4) In supported decision-making, the judgment and will of
                 the person are not contested, unlike in guardianship and
                 substituted decision-making.
                 5) Agencies that habitually deal with acts requiring an
                 exercise of legal capacity (such as banks, notaries,
                 judges, medical personnel) need to provide some support
                 measures as a form of reasonable accommodation.
      Article 13 guarantees access to justice for persons with disabilities,
      including through accommodations to facilitate acting as a witness or
      party in court proceedings and investigations, and requires training
      for police and others involved in the administration of justice.


           What needs to be done:


                 1) Provide accommodation to people with psychosocial
                 disabilities in investigations and court proceedings.  Such
                 accommodations may include access to support networks,
                 avoidance of emotional provocation, and acceptance of non-
                 conventional types of communication.


                 2) Repeal laws whereby persons with psychosocial
                 disabilities are disqualified from being complainants or
                 witnesses.


                 3) Abolish provisions whereby the trials of persons with
                 psychosocial disabilities are postponed indefinitely and
                 replace them with provisions that protect the due process
                 rights of persons with psychosocial disabilities.

      Article 14 guarantees liberty and security of the person on an equal
      basis with others, ensuring that disability cannot justify a
      deprivation of liberty, and that people with disabilities deprived of
      liberty are entitled to human rights guarantees on an equal basis with
      others and to reasonable accommodation.

           What needs to be done:

                 1) Repeal any laws that use disability as a factor to
                 justify a deprivation of liberty (e.g. mental health
                 commitment laws).


                 2) Release all individuals currently deprived of liberty in
                 psychiatric settings or based on psychosocial disability.


                 3) Ensure equal access for people with psychosocial
                 disabilities to procedures to determine guilt or innocence
                 of crimes, including the presumption of innocence and due
                 process.   (See also “What needs to be done” under Article
                 13, subsection 3.)


                 4) Provide reasonable accommodation in law enforcement
                 procedures, court proceedings and penal system.


      Article 15 prohibits torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
      or punishment, including medical experimentation without consent, on
      people with disabilities.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 Freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading
                 treatment or punishment is one of the most well established
                 principles of international human rights law.  Medical
                 experimentation without consent was first recognized as a
                 form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
                 punishment in the International Covenant on Civil and
                 Political Rights, Article 7.


                 1) Psychiatric drugs and other invasive methods such as
                 electroshock are inherently experimental and endanger the
                 mental and physical capacities, autonomy and personality of
                 an individual.  Use of such methods without free and
                 informed consent constitutes torture or cruel, inhuman or
                 degrading treatment or punishment.  The practice of forced,
                 coerced or deceptive psychiatric interventions must be
                 stopped immediately and criminally sanctioned.


                 2) Ensure that psychiatric interventions are not used for
                 purposes of interrogation, coercion or intimidation,
                 punishment, preventive measures, for any reason based on
                 discrimination of any kind (these are the purposes of
                 torture as defined in the UN Convention Against Torture,
                 Article 1), or for any purposes relating to the convenience
                 of third parties.  Such use must be prohibited whether in
                 psychiatric settings, prisons, residential services,
                 facilities for children or older persons, or in any other
                 setting.


                 3) Some psychiatric methods may be inherently inhuman and
                 degrading, and should be banned.  For example, direct
                 electroshock makes the person experience the full force of
                 the convulsion without anesthesia, in addition to the brain-
                 damaging effects of the shock itself, and it should be
                 considered a form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading
                 treatment, regardless of whether consent was sought or
                 obtained.


                 Please note that Article 25 requires that health care be
                 provided on the basis of free and informed consent.  This
                 may be a more direct basis for stopping forced, coercive
                 and deceptive psychiatric interventions, but advocates
                 should be aware that the freedom from torture and cruel,
                 inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is relevant
                 and applicable.

      Article 16 requires prevention of exploitation, violence and abuse,
      including monitoring of programs designed to serve people with
      disabilities, prosecution of violations where warranted, and measures
      to promote recovery and reintegration of victims.


           What needs to be done:


               1) Prevent all forms of exploitation, violence and abuse in
               family settings, communities and service provider
               facilities.  This includes sexual abuse and violence,
               economic exploitation and all other forms.


               2) Psychiatric interventions such as administration of
               drugs, electroshock or psychosurgery, done against the
               person’s will or without free and informed consent are forms
               of exploitation, violence and abuse that must be addressed
               by preventive measures, monitoring, prosecution and services
               to victims, as required by this Article.


               3) Survivors of exploitation, violence and abuse should have
               access to social support and services of their choice, which
               should not be conditioned on acceptance of a psychiatric
               diagnosis.


               4) Support should be provided to withdraw safely from
               psychiatric drugs.


      Article 17 guarantees to people with disabilities the right to respect
      for physical and mental integrity on an equal basis with others.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) The right to respect for integrity on an equal basis is
                 violated by violent or degrading practices done to people
                 with disabilities.  This right can be broader than the
                 right to be free from torture and cruel, inhuman or
                 degrading treatment or punishment, and may also be seen as
                 its more positive expression.

                 2) The right to integrity can be used to reject the
                 administration of psychosurgery, electroshock and
                 neuroleptic drugs on the grounds that these procedures and
                 drugs have a harmful effect on healthy organs and human
                 autonomy and creativity.


      Article 18 guarantees liberty of movement and freedom to choose one’s
      own residence, the right to a nationality and the right to use
      processes such as immigration proceedings.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 Laws and policies regarding international travel,
                 immigration and naturalization, should treat people with
                 disabilities on an equal basis with others, including
                 reasonable accommodation.  No one should be rejected from
                 entering a country based on past or present psychosocial
                 disability.

      Article 19 guarantees the right to live in the community with choices
      equal to those of others, including the choice of where and with whom
      to live, and ensures access to services that support such life
      choices.


           What needs to be done:


                 1) Free all our people from institutions.  Ensure that no
                 one is kept in an institution against his or her will, and
                 that housing and services are provided in communities.


                 2) Ensure that housing and services, including residential
                 services, respect individual autonomy.  End coercive
                 medication policies in residential and outpatient services.




                 3) Community services must be accessible and open to people
                 with psychosocial disabilities, and be responsive to their
                 needs.


                 4) Provide a wide array of services, developed in
                 consultation with user/survivor organizations, that may
                 include peer support, crisis hostels and places of safe
                 respite, and advocacy.

      Article 20 requires states to ensure personal mobility of persons with
      disabilities, with the greatest possible independence.


      Article 21 requires states to ensure that persons with disabilities
      can exercise the freedom of information and expression, through all
      forms of communication of their choice.


           What needs to be done:


                  1) Ensure that persons with psychosocial disabilities are
                  provided with full and accurate information.  A major
                  discrimination faced by persons living with psychosocial
                  disabilities is that we are told what people think we
                  should be told and not provided with the information we
                  have the right to receive and obtain.


                  2) Ensure that non-conventional communication by people
                  with psychosocial disabilities is accepted.


      Article 22 guarantees privacy and in particular, the privacy of
      personal, health and rehabilitation information of persons with
      disabilities on an equal basis with others.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 Protect persons with psychosocial disabilities from being
                 pressured to release medical records during custody
                 litigation and other court proceedings on an equal basis
                 with others.


      Article 23 guarantees equality in family, parenthood, marriage and
      relationships, and the right to retain fertility, and ensures that
      custody of children may not be deprived based on a parent’s or child’s
      disability.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) Repeal laws that disqualify people with disabilities
                 from marriage, consensual sexual relationships, or
                 exercising parental rights.


                 2) End forced or coerced sterilization or abortion on
                 people with psychosocial disabilities.  (See also Articles
                 15, 16, 17.)


                 3) Ensure that people do not lose the right or freedom to
                 have sexual relationships in residential programs or when
                 using the services of in-home assistants.


                 4) Personal assistants should be available to parents with
                 psychosocial disabilities if the parents wish to have such
                 assistance.

                 5) Train judges and lawyers to ensure that decisions about
                 custody of children do not reflect prejudice about parents
                 or children with disabilities.


      Article 24 guarantees the right to an inclusive education at all
      levels, including tertiary education and lifelong learning, and that
      no child shall be excluded from the general education system based on
      disability.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) Ensure that teachers are able to meet the diverse
                 learning needs of students, and provide a safe and
                 respectful academic and social environment.


                 2) Provide support and reasonable accommodation to students
                 with psychosocial or learning disabilities.  Identify and
                 meet needs without imposing labels on children.


                 3) Ensure that no child is excluded from education because
                 of psychosocial disability, or coerced to use mental health
                 services or psychiatric drugs as a condition for receiving
                 an education.


                 4) Provide opportunities and reasonable accommodation for
                 adults with psychosocial disabilities to complete their
                 education and participate in lifelong learning.

      Article 25 guarantees equality in health care and services, including
      the requirement of free and informed consent, and access to health
      care and services related to a disability, including early
      identification and intervention “as appropriate”.


           What needs to be done:


                 1) Ensure that the right to free and informed consent is
                 legally recognized and enforced without discrimination.


                 2) End forced/coerced medication in emergency rooms and
                 inpatient facilities.


                 3) Develop and promote alternatives to medical model
                 psychiatry that are adequately funded and independent of
                 medical system.  Ensure that alternatives exist for people
                 to receive support for mental and emotional needs without
                 accepting a psychiatric diagnosis.


                 4) Provide accurate information to people considering the
                 use of psychiatric drugs, electroshock and psychosurgery.
                 Such information should be developed in consultation with
                 users and survivors of psychiatry with diverse
                 perspectives, including those who had adverse and traumatic
                 experiences with the interventions in question.


                 5) Ensure that physical health problems are not
                 misidentified as psychosocial disability.


                 6) Mental health screening is an inappropriate application
                 of early identification and intervention that results in
                 labeling and discrimination rather than meeting human
                 needs.  In particular, no one should be prescribed
                 psychiatric drugs as a preventive measure.


                 7) End discriminatory practices regarding health insurance
                 and life insurance.

      Article 26 requires measures to enable people with disabilities to
      develop their abilities to the fullest extent, including through peer
      support, rehabilitation and habilitation.


           What needs to be done:


                 Ensure that peer support is recognized and promoted in
                 compliance with this Article.


      Article 27 guarantees non-discrimination and reasonable accommodation
      in the right to work and requires positive measures to ensure that the
      open labor market is inclusive to persons with disabilities and to
      promote opportunities for employment, career advancement and self-
      employment/entrepreneurship; slavery, servitude and forced labor are
      prohibited.


           What needs to be done:


                 1) Enact anti-discrimination laws and policies applicable
                 to all forms and sectors of employment, and ensure that
                 people with psychosocial disabilities are fully covered by
                 these laws on an equal basis with all others.


                 2) Include people with psychosocial disabilities in
                 programs to promote full employment and economic
                 empowerment.


                 3) Promote a wide range of employment opportunities and
                 career paths without discrimination based on disability.


                 4) Employ people with disabilities in public sector jobs
                 for which they are qualified.
                 5) Require reasonable accommodation in all aspects of
                 employment and qualifications for employment.


                 6) Promote self-employment, entrepreneurship, job sharing,
                 higher education to prepare for career of the person’s
                 choice.


                 7) End the exceptions to national labor laws given to
                 sheltered workshops or nonprofit organizations employing
                 persons with disabilities.  Such exceptions (for example,
                 allowing lower wages to be paid in these settings) do not
                 help people with disabilities but perpetuate exploitation
                 (contrary to Article 16) and constitute discrimination.


                 8) Employment for people with disabilities should be
                 treated as employment and not as therapy or charity.
                 Alternative employment and social enterprises are
                 worthwhile if they pay a living wage and comply with other
                 general requirements to preserve workers’ rights and
                 dignity.  “Sheltered workshops” that discriminate against
                 persons with disabilities with respect to pay can no longer
                 operate on that basis.


      Article 28 guarantees an adequate standard of living and access to
      social protection and poverty reduction programs, and to assistance
      with disability-related expenses, including respite care, for people
      with disabilities living in situations of poverty.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) Take all necessary measures to realize an adequate
                 standard of living for people with psychosocial
                 disabilities, including adequate food, water, clothes and
                 housing.  No one should be forced to enter an institution
                 for lack of the necessities of life.


                 2) Ensure that development and poverty reduction programs
                 include, and are responsive to, people with psychosocial
                 disabilities.


      Article 29 guarantees equality in political and public participation,
      including the right and opportunity of people with disabilities to
      vote and be elected, and obligates governments to promote the
      participation of people with disabilities in the conduct of public
      affairs, including through disabled people’s organizations.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) Ensure that no one is disqualified from voting on the
                 basis of psychosocial disability.


                 2) Ensure that people who are in institutions have the
                 right to vote.


                 3) Recognize and support organizations of users and
                 survivors of psychiatry on the national, regional,
                 international and local levels.


      Article 30 guarantees, among other things, the right to participate in
      cultural activities and to utilize one’s creative and intellectual
      potential, and the right
      of people with disabilities to respect and support for their cultural
      identities.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) Provide opportunities for people with psychosocial
                 disabilities to develop themselves and contribute to art,
                 science and other cultural work.


                 2) Ensure that cultural productions and sports and
                 recreation opportunities do not discriminate against the
                 participation of people with psychosocial disabilities as
                 participants or spectators.


                 3) Protect the rights of people with psychosocial
                 disabilities to practice their own indigenous, traditional
                 and/or minority cultures, and to develop programs and
                 services that are culturally competent and acceptable.


      Article 31 requires governments to collect information (including
      statistical and research data), in a manner that complies with
      confidentiality safeguards and international norms on the collection
      and use of statistics, to enable them to formulate policies to give
      effect to the Convention.


           What needs to be done:


                 Ensure that user/survivor organizations have input into the
                 decision of what type of information is collected, how it
                 is used, and whether or not it is disaggregated based on
                 the type of disability (e.g. whether statistics about
                 employment rates of people with disabilities are further
                 broken down to show people with psychosocial disabilities
                 compared with people with intellectual disabilities, blind,
                 deaf and deafblind people, people with physical
                 disabilities, etc.).

      Article 32 requires governments to promote and engage in international
      cooperation to realize the objectives of the Convention, including
      activities done in partnership with organizations of people with
      disabilities, by measures such as including people with disabilities
      in international development programs, facilitating capacity-building,
      cooperation in research, and technical and economic assistance.


           What needs to be done:


                 1) Ensure that international development programs comply
                 with the letter and spirit of the Convention, i.e. that
                 they support activities to give effect to the human rights
                 of people with disabilities as set out in the Convention,
                 and that they do not support activities that violate the
                 Convention or discriminate against people with
                 disabilities.


                 2) Support capacity-building of user/survivor organizations
                 according to the needs identified by those organizations.


                 3) Ensure that user/survivor organizations at the
                 international, regional, national and local levels have a
                 consultative role in international cooperation activities,
                 and can contribute as partners.  This may require financial
                 support and capacity building.

      Article 33 requires governments to set up separate mechanisms for
      implementation of the Convention and for monitoring of the convention,
      at a national level. The monitoring function can be done by a national
      human rights institution or a separate mechanism that meets the
      requirements for national human rights institutions, in particular
      independence from the political authorities. Organizations of people
      with disabilities are to be involved and participate fully in the
      monitoring process.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) The national focal point for implementation must have a
                 mechanism to consult closely with user/survivor
                 organizations.  Implementation of Article 33 can also draw
                 on Rule 17 of the Standard Rules on the Equalization of
                 Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities, which required
                 governments to set up a coordinating mechanism on
                 disability issues that includes organizations of people
                 with disabilities.


                 2) National monitoring is a new feature for a human rights
                 treaty, but many countries have national human rights
                 institutions with varying powers.   The establishment of a
                 monitoring mechanism, or assigning the monitoring function
                 to an existing human rights institution, must be done in
                 consultation with user/survivor organizations, and provide
                 for an ongoing role of user/survivor organizations in
                 contributing to its work.


                 3) The monitoring mechanism should include qualified users
                 and survivors of psychiatry as members and/or employees.

      Articles 34 through 39 and the Optional Protocol to the Convention
      deal with the creation and responsibilities of an international
      committee of experts to monitor the Convention. Governments are
      encouraged to nominate experts with disabilities to serve on this
      committee. Governments must report to the committee and consult
      organizations of people with disabilities in preparing these reports;
      organizations of people with disabilities can also communicate with
      the committee directly to inform them about the situation in their
      country. People with disabilities whose human rights have been
      violated can make a complaint to the committee if their government has
      ratified the optional protocol. The committee also has the power to
      investigate “grave and systematic” human rights violations, including
      through country visits, if a country has ratified the optional
      protocol.
       
           What needs to be done:


                 1) Establish an open and transparent process for nominating
                 candidates for the monitoring committee, seeking qualified
                 people with disabilities and candidates supported by
                 disabled people’s organizations.


                 2) Comply with reporting requirements and invite the
                 contribution of user/survivor organizations to national
                 reports.


                 3) Support the monitoring committee in seeking and
                 receiving communications from people with disabilities and
                 disabled people’s organizations.


                 4) Cooperate with the committee and with disabled people’s
                 organizations in improving compliance with the Convention.



      Article 40 provides for the conference of states parties to consider
      matters related to implementation of the Convention. This is a new
      feature for a human rights Convention and will facilitate regular
      exchange of information and capacity building by governments and civil
      society, including organizations of people with disabilities.


           What needs to be done:


                 1) Support the active participation of disabled people’s
                 organizations in the Conference of States Parties when it
                 considers matters related to implementation of the
                 Convention, for example to contribute to setting an agenda,
                 making presentations, and participating in panels and
                 discussions.


                 2) Contribute financial support for people with
                 disabilities from the Global South to attend these
                 meetings.


           ******************************************************

The full text of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
is available in several languages on the UN website at
http://www.un.org/disabilities/default.asp?navid=12&pid=150

           ******************************************************

                HOW CAN WE ACCOMPLISH WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE?

1.  POSITIVE MEASURES RELATING TO KEY ARTICLES OF THE CONVENTION

   Article 12:  Models for supported decision-making and totally voluntary
      services

    1)  Supported decision-making


      PO-Skåne - Personal Ombudspersons in Skåne, Sweden: a service which
      offers supported decision-making for persons with psychosocial
      disabilities


      Summary of an article by Maths Jesperson


      The social model of disability rejects the notion that the problem is
      within the individual, rather it is the society which does not meet
      the person in such a way that he or she can function.  Society must
      relate to the person in another way so that his or her difficulties in
      exercising legal capacity diminish.  If some people have difficulties
      communicating and expressing their wishes, the solution is to develop
      a relationship with the person and find ways to make it possible for
      the person to express and communicate what he or she wants.


      A Personal Ombudsperson (PO) is a professional who has the skills
      required to advocate effectively for a client’s rights in front of
      various authorities or in a court of law.  All the PO’s of PO-Skåne
      have academic degrees or similar education.  Most of them are social
      workers, some are lawyers.  They come from various ethnic backgrounds.
       The PO is not in alliance with psychiatry or social services or any
      other authority and not with the client’s relatives or any other
      person in the client’s surroundings.  The PO works only with the
      consent of his or her client. The PO does only what the client wants
      him or her to do.  It can take a long time, sometimes several months,
      before the client knows and dares to tell the PO what kind of help he
      or she wants.  The PO has to wait, even though a lot of things in the
      client’s life may be in chaos.  It usually takes the PO several years
      to develop a long-term relationship and build enough trust to be able
      to address essential matters.


      In other models, it is usually the clients who have to adjust to the
      bureaucratic system, but the PO-Skåne service works the other way.
      The PO’s have to be very flexible and creative and unconventional in
      finding ways to work with their clients.  Many clients are very
      suspicious or hostile or hard to reach for other reasons.  The PO has
      to go out and meet them where they are.  Making contact sometimes
      takes several months.  It could involve going out to the park to start
      talking to a homeless person or talking through the mail drop with
      someone who lives barricaded in their apartment.


      There is no formal procedure to get a PO.  After a relationship has
      been established the PO just asks, “Do you want me to be your PO?”  If
      the answer is yes, then the matter is settled.  The PO doesn’t keep
      any records.  All documents belong to the client.  When the PO/client
      relationship is terminated, the PO has to return all papers to the
      client or burn them together with the client.  No papers or notes
      remain with the PO.


      The PO-Skåne service has been in existence for over 10 years.  It
      started in 1995 with 2 PO’s.  In 2000 it became a permanent user-run
      service and today it has 25 PO’s working full time.  Two thirds of the
      financing is provided by that State and one third is provided by the
      local community.  For more information see www.po-skane.org (in
      Swedish and English language) or contact Maths Jesperson at
      maths.jesperson@bredband.net.



    2)  What can we learn from traditional models of healing?


      Summary of a research study conducted by Bhargavi Davar, Deepra
      Dandekar, Madhura Lohokare and Deepak Salunke on “Health and Healing
      in Western Maharashatra: The role of traditional healing centers in
      mental health service delivery.”


      A large class of pre-modern institutions or traditional healing
      centers nurture people in their existential quest for emotional and
      spiritual growth.  People who come there are not labeled with “mental
      illness”, though many bring emotional and other difficulties.  In a
      detailed study of more than 20 traditional healing centers in India,
      it became clear that these institutions organize their spaces and
      their philosophies around the experiences of distress, recovery and
      personal growth and not around “mental illness”.  Built into the
      values of such centers is a respect for each person’s capacity, as a
      person is fully involved in their own recovery process through the
      performance of ritual.  Most importantly, the centers value
      voluntarism and choice.


      Compared to mental hospitals, cultural healing centers are very
      accessible in all parts of the State to all kinds of people.
      Furthermore, these are not “paid” services in the free market sense.
      Here, pre-capitalistic economies leave the economic decisions to the
      individuals using the centers.  Each center is known for its powers to
      cure something specific: e.g. distress caused by infertility or
      alcohol addiction.


      Each center has its own philosophy, but some common themes related to
      personal recovery are: linkage to life, community, nature, to other
      human beings, to their own self-expression and to the cosmos/some
      transcendental dimension.  Health is mind/spirit/body, all together.
      There is no “mental” separate from the bodily and the cosmological.
      Many people were struggling with the personal and inter-personal,
      philosophical and existential questions of life and seeking, if not
      finding, answers through these centers.  They are not seen as
      “incapable” people.  The center acts as a retreat for those people to
      find themselves and move on in their lives.


      The architecture of the healing centers consists of open and airy
      community spaces.  There are no high walls, wires, grills, or locks
      anywhere.  There are no solitary cells.  People who are seen as
      violent and dangerous are out in the open, in front of everybody,
      posing a moral question to the community all the time.  They might
      have been tied to a tree or to a stairway, but they maintained their
      interactions with the community.  The community had the moral
      obligation of providing for their personal needs (including a bit of
      sky).  They were not isolated or forgotten.


      People visiting have access to all parts of these centers.  There is
      no division of spaces between the healers and the users and their
      families.  Community healing spaces exist where everyone participates
      equally, although under the directorship of the healer.  Everyone
      involved in the ritual healing assumes a part of the responsibility in
      the healing.  In the local healing centers, the healing is primarily
      interactional and the working spaces where healing actions take place
      are organized in congruence with this outlook.


      There are a variety of sensory inputs in the architecture and in the
      ritual practices.  Spaces are organized in a seamless and negotiable
      manner, suited to human living and community negotiation and bonding.
      Large open spaces are available for celebrations, dancing, trance,
      drumming, chanting, possession, mediumship, etc.  In one center there
      are healing séances – an intense form of psychodrama.


      The landscape of the place is also a part of life and well being.
      Nature itself is sanctified and becomes part of the ritual life and
      habitat in many of these centers.  The tree is a symbol of stability,
      hope and vitality and people can connect to this symbol in an
      intensely personal way.  They literally pin their hopes and pains,
      sometimes their aggressions, on the trees.  As the tree is witness to
      the life worlds of millions of people, tens of years before and will
      continue to be witness for ten years after, the tree carries a sense
      of eternity for the sufferer beyond individual mortality.


      In one sect, the users seeking their own recovery can join a group of
      wanderers who wander and journey with sheep, caring for them.  It is
      believed that the sheep have miraculous healing powers.  The users
      live in the freedom and space of nature, their lives anchored to and
      their experiences shaped by the lives of the sheep.  Wandering
      minstrels are also found living or staying temporarily in many of
      these centers.  From experiencing another kind of imagination,
      wandering has led to spiritual re-opening for at least some people.


      The local healing centers deal with personal agitation, anger and
      violence in a gentler, playful ritualized manner that brings the
      person back to the community quickly and does not fully rob the person
      of dignity, freedom and liberty.  Violence is seen as a part of
      existence and is attributed to external causes (e.g. spirits or
      demons) and so individual labeling or criminalizing does not occur.
      The individual healers had sufficient inner stability and confidence
      in their practice and healing traditions to tame the angry spirits or
      demons and return the person intact and whole to the community.
      Healers who believe they are protected by the divine are not afraid of
      human follies.  They do not exhibit anger or anxiety or fear when
      confronted with the violence of the evil spirit.  An angry and evil
      spirit spells trouble and destruction for the whole community, not
      just for the person – so the community has a stake in the safe return
      of their relative.  Any imputed or actual violence that happens in the
      context of suffering is understood as an indicator of external forces
      and as a community issue and remedies are sought within the healing
      and ritualized network rather than within an individualistic
      punishment framework.



    3) Non-coercive alternatives; reframing notions of ‘safety’ and ‘risk’
      with regard to shared risk and responsibility; and pre-crisis planning



      Summary prepared by Chris Hansen and Shery Mead


      The  Chinese  symbol  for  crisis  has   two   parts:   “danger”   and
      “opportunity”. Many of the most defining and pivotal  revelations  and
      changes in our lives emerge  from  such  painful  and  chaotic  times.
      Forced treatment of people deemed to be experiencing a  mental  health
      crisis assumes the worst,  and  in  denying  people  their  voice  and
      choice, denies them also the chance to  redefine  themselves,  change,
      grow and find the awaiting opportunities. The  trauma  experienced  in
      such loss frequently damages our sense of autonomy,  worth  and  self-
      determination. We come to believe that we are  bad  or  dangerous,  or
      that we require others  to  make  decisions  for  us  because  we  are
      incapable. One of the greatest losses we experience is the loss of our
      sense of who we are in the context of our community. An experience  of
      forced treatment causes us to abandon our lives, and we  return  to  a
      community that sees us as dangerous, vulnerable, volatile and “ill”.


      A number of peer-run alternatives to crisis have been  developed  over
      the years, and there is now a growing body of  research  available  to
      both  confirm  their  effectiveness,  and  to  support  their  ongoing
      development. In their Crisis Hostel research  project,  Jeanne  Dumont
      and Kristine Jones, found  that  the  test  group  (who  could  choose
      between the hostel and hospitalization), had better healing  outcomes,
      greater levels of empowerment, higher  levels  of  self  care,  and  a
      reduction in traditional crisis services than the  control  group  who
      could only access the hospital. One  study  examined  changes  in  the
      stories of people who had many previous hospitalizations and were  now
      using a trauma-informed peer run crisis alternative. They found  that,
      where many people had taken on a strong identity of  “mental  patient”
      after repeated  hospitalizations,  the  alternative  outcome  included
      “critical learning” (being able to redefine one’s role, and not seeing
      one’s self as “crazy”).


      A user/survivor tells a story of multiple  losses  and  stresses  that
      left her feeling that suicide was the only viable solution:


            “In hospital I was treated as though I deserved to be punished.
           People treat their animals better than many psychiatric patients
           are treated. Any self-respect I had quickly  disappeared.  As  a
           result of a rather long  hospitalization  I  lost  my  well-paid
           management  job, custody of one of my children, my  friends  and
           social supports, and ended up having to rely  on  benefits,  the
           food-bank and other charities. It has taken me many, many  years
           to regain my sense of self, and to this  day  I  still  struggle
           with the sense of shame and ‘otherness’ this experience created.
           The sad thing is that if someone had lent me a  caring  ear  and
           helped me to see the options, none of this would have happened.”
            (user/survivor of psychiatry)


      The best-intentioned use of coercion can lead to irreparable damage.


           “I was forced into hospital, held down and drugged. I  now  have
           post-traumatic stress and flash-backs from that  time  that  are
           worse than any ‘diagnosis’ I was given before then. I would  far
           rather have been sent  to  the  police  station  and  borne  the
           consequences of a person who had violated the law  than  treated
           as  person  who  is  unable  to   reason.”   (user/survivor   of
           psychiatry)


      The widely-held view that coercive treatment potentially  saves  lives
      and protects society is  a  form  of  social  control  that  fails  to
      acknowledge the cost and the damage to the individuals  concerned.  It
      also overlooks the number of people who as a result can’t find  a  way
      out of the mental health system (‘chronic mental  patients’)  and  the
      countless other social problems forced treatment creates.


      Crisis alternatives are not only imperative, then, as  an  alternative
      to what is frequently experienced as the trauma of  forced  treatment,
      but there is growing evidence that they are  more  effective  in  many
      measurable ways.


      Peer-run crisis alternatives can operate from  a  set  of  assumptions
      completely different from traditional services.  Traditional  services
      focus  of  finding  a  diagnosis  and   treating   it   (predominantly
      pharmacologically) whereas crisis alternatives can focus on how people
      have  made  meaning  out  of  their  experience,   building   mutually
      responsible relationships, and creating “new stories.” Peer-run crisis
      alternatives that  are  trauma-informed  recognize  that  past  trauma
      (including psychiatric hospitalization) results in a way of seeing and
      relating  that  leaves  people  disconnected,  isolated,  and  shamed,
      providing  an  awareness  of  how  people’s  individual  painful  life
      experiences  (physical,  sexual  and  emotional  abuse,  major   loss,
      disaster, war, forced treatment, etc.) impact every  aspect  of  their
      lives.


      Understanding that the way we see, relate, act and know occurs  within
      the context of our histories, there is no assumption of  a  ‘problem’,
      and therefore no need for assessment or evaluation. Instead peers work
      at developing new ways of communicating their needs  and  feelings  to
      one another without threat or coercion. For some of us,  for  example,
      thinking and speaking of Suicide is a way of dealing with  our  strong
      feelings.  To  be  able  to  talk  about  what  those   feelings   are
      (acknowledging that Suicide is not a feeling); when, why and how  they
      arise, and having the option of exploring  other  ways  of  expressing
      them  without  the  threat  of  hospitalization  requires   both   the
      willingness  to  sit  with  the  discomfort  on  both  sides  of   the
      conversation, and the courage to negotiate other ways of thinking  and
      talking about it.


      Trauma-informed peer support does not assume a diagnosis or a problem.
      Instead, the focus is on developing relationships that  are  committed
      to mutual  learning,  growth  and  challenging  of  one  another.  The
      traditional ‘expert-patient’, or ‘helper-helpee’ roles are replaced by
      the expectation of a mutual  relationship  involving  give  and  take.
      Being constantly the receiver of services has meant that  many  of  us
      have lost much of our sense of having valid and respected roles within
      our communities.


      Crisis alternatives can  provide  the  opportunity  to  challenge  the
      traditional notions of risk and safety.  Risk,  safety  and  liability
      define  and  drive  much  of  the  mental  health  services   provided
      currently. The underlying message we assimilate as  service  users  is
      that we are dangerous, fragile and out  of  control.   Safety  becomes
      about other people’s discomfort.


      Peer crisis alternatives, on the other hand, can offer the  safety  of
      trusting relationships that are mutually negotiated. We can  begin  to
      talk about  shared  risk,  shared  responsibility,  and  to  start  to
      practice new ways of responding when we have strong feelings. Power is
      discussed honestly, and we can support one another in taking risks  in
      an environment where making mistakes is  not  just  tolerated,  it  is
      encouraged.


      As well as offering a response to crisis that will  listen,  validate,
      explore and challenge old and  new  ways  of  making  meaning,  crisis
      alternatives can provide the  opportunity  to  develop  a  ‘pro-active
      crisis plan or interview’. This is a structured  pre-prepared  process
      that can serve as a type of advance directive, as well  as  being  one
      resource with which to enhance the development  of  the  relationship.
      Individuals practicing peer support are taught to use the interview as
      a template to guide them  in  a  process  of  discussion  and  growing
      dialogue.


      Some  crisis  alternatives  provide  a  venue-  usually  a   home-like
      environment in the community where people can stay for a few nights in
      the company of peers. Others provide home-based services  or  peer-run
      options at a venue open during the day.


      Here are some questions  that  may  provide  the  basis  of  a  crisis
      interview and plan:
      1. What peer support/crisis alternative is and what it’s not (not
      about treatment, people not seen as ill, but seen as responsible
      adults trying to learn something).
      2. Relationships and the importance of mutual healing (it needs to
      work both ways, exploring how mutual relationships have been helpful
      and/or taken our power).
      3. Facilitate a non-illness story (building on a person’s subjective
      experience and language).
      4. Thinking “from a distance” (How might someone else describe your
      difficult experiences)?
      5. Think together about the kinds of things that make a difference
      (Crisis as opportunity for growth rather than returning to baseline).


      After the basic introduction is built, some guideline questions are
      suggested:


           Crisis Interview:

           1. If you use this crisis alternative instead of another crisis
           service, and it worked really well for you, what would be
           different in your life?


                 What are some other things in your life that have already
                 led to that kind of difference?

                 How will we know if that’s what’s happening while you’re
                 here?


           2. Can you describe a positive experience you’ve had in which
           people were able to challenge you into trying new things? Who
           were the people involved? What were they doing?

                 What do you need in order to “hear” that challenge from
                 people here?

                 How will you challenge us if you feel that we’re “stuck?”

           3. Imagine that there is no mental health language.


                 Describe yourself on a really good day (what are you
                 feeling, what are you doing, with whom)?


                 On a really bad day:

           4. Can you describe a time when you were headed towards a really
           bad time and you decided, and then were able, to turn it around?



                 Who or what helped?

                 What did they do?


                 When you’ve turned it around, what were you able to
                 accomplish?


           5. What would you be willing to try when you’re using the crisis
           alternative?

                 How will you/we know if you’re trying it?


                 What do you want to make sure we’re doing while you’re
                 here?


                 How will you/we know if we’re trying?




        References:


        Bloom, S. (1997). Creating Sanctuary: Toward the evolution of sane
        societies. New York, Routledge.

        Copeland, M.E. and Mead, S. (2004) Wellness recovery action plan
        and
        peer support: Personal, group and program development. Dummerston,
        VT:
        Peach Press.

        Dumont, J. and Jones, K. (2004). Findings from a consumer/survivor
        defined alternative to psychiatric hospitalization. Outlook,
        Spring, 4-6.

        MacNeil C., and Mead, S. (2005). A narrative approach to developing
        standards for trauma-informed peer support. American Journal of
        Evaluation, 26(2), 231-244.

        Mead, S. and Hilton, D. (2003). Crisis and Connection. Psychiatric
        Rehabilitation Journal 27(1), 87-94.
         
        Mead, Shery (2005), Peer Support: An Alternative Approach. Shery
        Mead.
         
        Mosher, L. R. (1999). Soteria and Other Alternatives to Acute
        Psychiatric Hospitalisation: A Personal and Professional Review.
        The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 187, 142-149.


        O’Hagan, M. (2006). The Acute Crisis: Towards a recovery plan for
        acute mental health services in New Zealand.  Wellington, New
        Zealand: Mental Health Commission (Available from www.mhc.govt.nz).


        Podvoll, E., (1990). The Seduction of Madness: Revolutionary
        Insights into the World of Psychosis and a Compassionate Approach
        to Recovery at Home. Harper Collins Publishers, NY.
         
        SAMHSA. Roadmap to Seclusion and Restraint Free Mental Health
        Services, (2006):
        http://www.mentalhealth.samhsa.gov/publications/allpubs/sma06-
        4055/.


        Stastny, P and Lehman, P (2007) Alternatives Beyond Psychiatry.
        Peter Lehmann Publishing.


    4) Peer advocacy (relates also to Article 13 on Access to Justice)

      Summary of an article written by Dan Hazen
 
      “An ex-patient voice has been let into the oftentimes oppressive
      psychiatric system to see that the needs of those who are often
      unheard are heard.  Clearly a milestone has been made through the
      efforts of a group of people who for years have been stigmatized,
      discriminated against, abused by the system and otherwise ‘kept down’
      or kept quiet by certain factions in society.”  Gloria C. Hale
       
      Peer Advocacy refers to the process or act of a person of equal
      standing pleading the cause of a person who shares that equal
      standing.  An example is a lawyer who provides a legal defense for
      another lawyer.  Another example is a person who has an experience of
      emotional difficulties or challenges providing advocacy for another
      person with similar experiences. 
       
      Peer Advocacy was developed to assist persons who are, have been, or
      might become involved in the psychiatric system.  Peer Advocates speak
      out so that the individual’s choices and wishes are made clear and
      respected.   
       
      Peer Advocacy is an innovative and exciting vehicle of empowerment. 
      Many people experience stigmatization and discrimination as a result
      of psychiatric labelling.  Peer advocates have a common bond of having
      received psychiatric treatment.
       
      What is a Peer Advocate: - Peer Advocacy is non-clinical and Peer
      Advocates are not part of the “mental health system”.
       
      A Peer Advocate represents someone else’s interests.  The individual
      being represented is the person who should define his or her interests
      – within the bounds of the law and mutual propriety.  The job of the
      Peer Advocate is to help the individual get as much as possible of
      what he or she wants and what he or she is legally entitled to.  Peer
      Advocates inform the individual about the options, assist the person
      in expressing preferences, and ensure that these preferences are heard
      and vigorously pursued within the scope of the law.  A Peer Advocate
      may appear to be in charge, but this should never result in setting
      the goals for the individual.
       
      Peer advocates may accompany the individual to situations such as
      “treatment team meetings”, discharge planning meeting, medication over
      objection hearings, and retention hearings in the court system. 
      (Forced treatment and detention must be stopped under the Convention,
      but there is still a role for Peer Advocates to ensure that these
      practices do not return.)  Peer Advocates may monitor court
      proceedings in a community to address and to report on violations of
      civil liberties and human rights.
       
      Peer Advocacy ensures a practice of reasonable accommodation,
      supported decision making, and attempts to establish, expand, protect
      and enforce the human, legal and civil rights of people all people,
      particularly people engaged by the psychiatric/mental health system.



    5) Advanced directives

      Currently legally binding advanced directives are being developed for
      use in circumstances when a person is incapacitated.   Advanced
      directives can include the designation of an agent to make decisions
      on one’s behalf as well as specific directives regarding health care.




      Supported decision-making will necessitate the development of advanced
      directives that are not based on incapacity but are designed to
      communicate a person’s desires while retaining his or her legal
      capacity.



   Article 14: Reasonable Accommodation in the Criminal Justice System for
      Persons with Psychosocial Disabilities


      Summary of an article written by Mari Yamamoto

      When we advocate for no forced treatment and to abolish the insanity
      defense, we are faced with arguments not only like, "Do you let people
      with mental illness just die?" but also, “Do you want mentally ill
      people to face the death penalty or let them be in prisons?  It is too
      cruel."


      According to the principles of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
      with Disabilities, reasonable accommodation must be provided if a
      person with a psychosocial disability is lawfully detained.  However,
      reasonable accommodation cannot justify low standards of human rights
      for all, or the existence of the death penalty, and so we must seek
      the
      reform of the whole criminal justice system to fully realize
      reasonable accommodation for persons with psychosocial disabilities. 
      Furthermore, we support alternatives to incarceration and the
      discretion to refrain from prosecution where appropriate, so long as
      these measures do not
      involve compulsory psychiatric treatment.

      While we cannot agree with the insanity defense in principle, it needs
      to be left open as a practical option as long as the death penalty and
      other harsh measures are being used in the penal system.  We think
      that all people should be protected from the death penalty and other
      punishments that cause great harm.  Such protection must not be
      conditioned on persons with disabilities accepting an inferior status
      of legal incapacity in the determination of responsibility for crimes.
       Therefore we seek abolition of the insanity defense as part of a
      comprehensive penal reform.  We do not condone compulsory psychiatric
      detention or treatment for people acquitted by reason of insanity.

      Violations of human rights still do exist all over the world for any
      persons in the criminal justice system, but here we address what
      reasonable accommodation would look like in a just system.


      What is needed:


      1) To guarantee the right of due process for persons with psychosocial
      disabilities


        a) Some people need support to be guaranteed effective access to
           information
           and communication (see Article 21).

           For example:


           support for getting legal services,
           peer support for self advocacy, or
           family support both before and after being prosecuted.


           Friends or family are often denied access to persons after they
           have been arrested and in many cases during interrogation before
           prosecution.  Only lawyers have access to the person who has
           been arrested, but many lawyers do not know how to communicate
           effectively with persons with psychosocial disabilities.


        b) To guarantee the right of bail


           If the person who is arrested is confused or has a psychosocial
           disability, the right to bail is necessary and should not lead
           to forced hospitalization.  The person should have the option of
           being in a place where his or her human rights are guaranteed
           and respected and where his or her disability is accommodated.


           For example, in some countries a person who has been arrested
           can be detained for several weeks while facing police
           interrogation.  Persons who are appealing a verdict claiming
           they are innocent are sometimes detained while awaiting appeal.
           Persons who are injured, however, are eligible for bail.
           Persons with psychosocial disabilities should be accorded the
           same accommodation, both before and after prosecution.

      2) In prison


        a) Some people need support to guarantee effective access to
           information and communication.  See examples as above in 1 a).


        b) Access to education, medical treatments, therapies, exercise,
           and other activities should be guaranteed to persons with
           psychosocial disabilities on an equal basis with others.


        c) Persons with disabilities should not be put into isolation cells
           on the basis of disability.


        d) Persons with psychosocial disabilities should not be segregated
           into “special prisons”; however, persons with psychosocial
           disabilities who are in prison should have access to support of
           their choosing to accommodate their disability.

      Reasonable accommodation in the criminal justice system is a subject
      that clearly needs further discussion.  Please contribute your
      thoughts and experience.


   Article 23: Custody matters




      Develop models to support parents with psychosocial disabilities as
      well as children with psychosocial disabilities to maintain family
      relationships through crises.  This will involve retraining/educating
      family court judges, lawyers, law guardians, Child Protective Workers,
      teachers, school psychologists, therapists, etc.


   Article 27: Employment


      How do we put reasonable accommodation into practice for users and
      survivors?


           •   Periods of unemployment due to psychosocial disability
           should not count against a person’s work record.


           •   Environment may need to be quiet or stimulating.


           •   Supervision and work relationships may need to be worked out
           flexibly over a longer period than usual.


           •   Provide access to support from job coaches for people who
           wish to utilize such support.


   2.  DEVELOP ORGANIZATIONS AND SUPPORT FOR USERS AND SURVIVORS TO OPPOSE
   COERCIVE PSYCHIATRY


        • Individuals


        • Local organizations


        • National organizations


        • Regional organizations


      Promote young users and survivors to take leadership roles in our
      organizations to build the ongoing strength of the movement


      “Nothing About Us Without Us” (motto of the International Disability
      Caucus): We users and survivors are the experts on our own
      experiences.


3.  DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A NETWORK WITH OTHER DISABILITY RIGHTS ACTIVISTS


      • International Disability Caucus (IDC)


      • International Disability Alliance (IDA)


      • Consortiums of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) led by disabled
      people’s organizations including organizations of users and survivors
      of psychiatry, at the local, national and regional levels


      • Build alliances with people from the United Nations agencies such as
      the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), United
      Nations Development Programme (UNDP), etc. in all countries.

4.  DEVELOP GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR THE CONVENTION

      • Build alliances with members of parliament and national government


      • In countries that are resistant to ratifying the Convention at
      national level, encourage state and local governments to pass
      resolutions in support of the Convention and work for its
      implementation.

5.  EDUCATE OURSELVES ABOUT HUMAN RIGHTS [TO BE ADDED]

6.  DEVELOP RELATIONSHIPS WITH THE MEDIA  [TO BE ADDED]
                                 MONITORING

1. Role for user/survivor organizations


      • Educate governments


      • Advise governments as experts


2. National monitoring

      • Work with national human rights institutions or new mechanisms that
      may be set up to monitor the Convention at the national level.  Such
      mechanisms need to be independent from the government and have control
      over their own budgets.  They should be composed in a way that
      reflects all sectors and diverse populations of the country and
      include people with disabilities (including users and survivors of
      psychiatry) and be responsive to diverse communities.  Their roles may
      vary but can include proposing legislation, making recommendations on
      positive measures for implementation, and in some cases, adjudicating
      complaints of human rights violations.


3. Participation in UN monitoring

      • CRPD Conference of States Parties and Treaty Body (Committee on the
      Rights of Persons with Disabilities)


           Many governments and NGOs would like the Conference of States
           Parties to be a forum for sharing information and discussing
           challenges in implementing the Convention.  This is different
           from the role the Conference of States Parties has played in
           other human rights treaties, but this type of forum has been
           done with environmental treaties and other treaties where
           information-sharing is important.  We do not yet know whether
           this will be implemented, or when, but user/survivor
           organizations that are interested in international forums for
           cooperation of this kind should keep it in mind when making
           plans and budgets.


           The Treaty Body is a committee of experts chosen by the
           Conference of States Parties to oversee compliance with the
           Convention.  Experts should be knowledgeable in the area of
           human rights and disability, and participation of experts with
           disabilities (including users and survivors of psychiatry) is
           desirable.  Experts are nominated by governments that are States
           Parties to the Convention (i.e. that have ratified the
           Convention).


           The main functions of the Committee are:


               • to receive and comment on reports from governments about
                 their implementation of the Convention and to what extent
                 the human rights of people with disabilities are realized
                 in their country, including any obstacles or challenges;


               • to issue general comments or recommendations as guidance to
                 States Parties in implementing the Convention (such
                 comments or recommendations can deal with emerging issues
                 or clarify areas that are poorly understood);

               • to receive individual complaints (if the State Party has
                 ratified the Optional Protocol) and decide on their merits
                 (i.e. whether the State Party has violated the individual’s
                 rights under the Convention), and recommend actions to be
                 taken to resolve the complaint (including urgent interim
                 measures to prevent irreparable harm);

               • to investigate grave and systematic violations of the
                 Convention, including by a visit to the country concerned,
                 and make recommendations to rectify the situation.

           NGOs (including organizations of users and survivors of
           psychiatry) can communicate with members of the treaty body in
           the following ways:


               • NGO reports or “shadow reports” drawing attention to human
                 rights violations or concerns in a country that is
                 reporting to the Committee.  NGO reports can be
                 comprehensive, covering the whole Convention, or can be
                 focused on particular articles or issues.  A growing trend
                 is for NGOs in a country to unite in preparing one large
                 report with many sections contributed by different
                 constituencies.  It is not necessary to be a lawyer to do a
                 “shadow report” but NGOs should be able to give references
                 for facts presented and to point to the articles of the
                 Convention that have been violated, or are otherwise
                 relevant.


               • Helping individuals to make complaints of human rights
                 violations to the Committee.  It is important to
                 familiarize oneself with the procedures of the Committee
                 and to consider the best uses of this mechanism; it is also
                 important to make sure to educate members of the Committee
                 on any issues in an individual complaint that may be poorly
                 understood.

               • Attending the Committee’s session in Geneva to present
                 information (usually based on the NGO report) in sessions
                 held for that purpose; also meeting with committee members
                 individually and holding side events on issues of concern.

               • The Committee can ask NGOs to help governments by providing
                 technical assistance on issues within the competence of an
                 NGO.  This may be relevant for user/survivor organizations
                 that have developed good programs on supported decision-
                 making, peer support, legislative reforms on legal capacity
                 complying with article 12, etc., and are in a position to
                 advise on such matters.

               • DPOs (disabled people’s organizations), including
                 organizations of users and survivors of psychiatry, should
                 be consulted by the government in nominating members of the
                 Committee.

               • DPOs should lead any NGO coalitions that make shadow
                 reports; if DPOs are not in a position to lead
                 administratively (other organizations may have better
                 resources, etc.) it should be a principle of the coalition
                 that DPOs are the experts on their own issues (e.g. that a
                 user/survivor organization is the expert on user/survivor
                 issues) so that DPOs are leading the work in substance.

      • Other UN Treaty Bodies and Human Rights Mechanisms


           1) International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
           Rights (ICESCR), monitored by the Committee on Economic, Social
           and Cultural Rights


           2) International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
           monitored by the Human Rights Committee


           3) International Convention on the Elimination of all forms of
           Racial Discrimination (ICERD), monitored by the Committee
           Against Racial Discrimination


           4) Convention Against Torture (CAT), monitored by the Committee
           Against Torture


           4a) Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture (OPCAT),
           monitored by the Subcommittee for the Prevention of Torture


           5) Convention to Eliminate all forms of Discrimination Against
           Women (CEDAW), monitored by the Committee to Eliminate
           Discriminate Against Women


           6) Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), monitored by the
           Committee on the Rights of the Child


           7) International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
           All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families, monitored by
           the Committee on Migrant Workers


           8) Human Rights Council, created by the UN General Assembly
           (replaces the former Human Rights Commission).  Governments are
           elected to the Human Rights Council, which meets in Geneva to
           look into situations of concern both thematically and in
           individual countries.  The new mechanism of Universal Peer
           Review (UPR) will allow the Council to look into the human
           rights situation in each country, comprehensively.  NGOs can
           submit information to the Universal Peer Review process.


           The Human Rights Council also designates Special Rapporteurs,
           who are independent experts assigned to look into situations and
           subject matter of concern to human rights.  For example, there
           is a Special Rapporteur on Torture, one on Health, one on
           Education, one on Violence against women.  It is possible that a
           Special Rapporteur on Disability or the Human Rights of Persons
           with Disabilities will be designated in the future.  However, at
           the present time, there is a Special Rapporteur on the Standard
           Rules on Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with
           Disabilities, who is appointed by the Commission on Social
           Development rather than the Human Rights Council.  NGOs and
           individuals can submit information to the Special Rapporteurs of
           the Human Rights Council; it is important to check the
           procedures and use any forms provided so that your information
           is handled in the best way.



      Information about the human rights mechanisms of the United Nations
      can be found at:  www.ohchr.org


           ******************************************************



                                 APPENDICES

1. IDC Legal Capacity Task Force Principles on Implementation of Article 12


    [TO BE ADDED]


2. Glossary of unfamiliar terms and acronyms
   [TO BE ADDED]


3. Names of WNUSP members who worked on the Convention:


      David Webb, Australia
      Ron Carten, Canada
      Karl Bach, Denmark
      Iris Hoelling, Germany
      Janet Amegatcher, Ghana
      Alpha B. Diop, Guinea
      Gabor Gombos, Hungary
      John McCarthy, Ireland
      Mary Maddock, Ireland
      Frank Mulcahy, Ireland
      Amita Dhanda, India
      Tristano Ajmone, Italy
      Mari Yamamoto, Japan
      Ryugan, Japan
      Edah Maina, Kenya
      Chris Hansen, New Zealand
      Mary O’Hagan, New Zealand
      Elena Chavez, Peru
      Moosa Salie, South Africa
      David Stolper, South Africa
      Maths Jesperson, Sweden
      Daniel Iga, Uganda
      Mary Nettle, UK
      Kay Sheldon, UK
      Tina Minkowitz, USA
      Myra Kovary, USA
      Kate Millett, USA
      Judi Chamberlin, USA
      Sylvia Caras, USA
      Diana S. Kline, USA
      Michele Magar, USA
      MindFreedom International team, led by Celia Brown, USA






   Please let us know if we omitted your name!
   4. Reading list
      Human rights law:
      Minkowitz, Tina. (2007).  “The United Nations Convention on the Rights
      of Persons with Disabilities and the Right to be Free from
      Nonconsensual Psychiatric Interventions,” Syracuse Journal of
      International Law and Commerce Vol. 34 No. 2.
      Dhanda, Amita. (2007). “Legal Capacity in the Disability Rights
      Convention:
      Stranglehold of the Past or Lodestar of the Future?” Syracuse Journal
      of International Law and Commerce Vol. 34 No. 2.
      Alternatives:
      Stastny, Peter and Lehman, Peter, Editors. (2007) Alternatives Beyond
      Psychiatry, Peter Lehmann Publishing


   Please suggest additions that are specifically related to the
   international aspects of the Convention.












                    ************************************
  ************************************************************************

             Motto of the International Disability Caucus (IDC)


                        “NOTHING ABOUT US WITHOUT US”

****************************************************************************
                     **********************************
